Okay, we're rolling.
First of all, I just wondered if you might tell us a little bit about how you were in
the origin of the column in Locust, if you're right.
Well, about two and a half years ago, I was invited to address a group of authors, American
Society of Journalists and Authors, and I chose to talk to them about certain contractual
causes that I thought might be pitfalls in most professional authors.
In the questioning that followed, I found an appalling ignorance on the part of authors
on the subject of contracts, and many of these people are highly respected professional journalists
and book authors, and yet it was clear to me that they didn't know anything, or very much
I should say, about how to read a contract, how to negotiate one, and how to alter a clause
to their own benefit, and so I decided to write a column for the many other writers who
probably are in the same position.
And I asked Charles Brown, the editor of Locust, a publisher of Locust, I guess, whether he'd
be interested in publishing it, and he was quite agreeable, and thereafter, I said,
a number of magazines, newsletters published by other writers groups such as Western Writers
of America, Romance Writers of America, Mystery Writers of America, took on the column because
they felt the authors were in the same position.
So actually, Locust then, was your first magazine of that type that you wrote the column for?
Yes, Locust was, I still consider myself as writing the column for Locust.
Okay, fine.
Would you be allowed to tell me which science fiction authors are just some of them that
you do represent?
Well, no, I don't mind at all.
It's a fairly common knowledge in the science fiction community.
We represent Harlan Ellison, Gregory Benford, Greg Behr, Elizabeth Lin, Bartor Randall,
Barry Wong here, Warren Norwood, Jessica Sammonson, and I'd say three or four more.
Okay, if you had to sell a decent manuscript by an unknown author, would you prefer to
work with Romance, the Western, the Mystery of Science Fiction, or what sort of genre
literature?
Well, my orientation has always been the paperbacked original market.
Not that my agency doesn't handle hard covers.
We handle quite a lot of them, dozens and dozens of hard covers, and many have been on
the best seller list, book club selections, and so forth.
But the broad of the industry is the paperbacked market, and the paperbacked market does break
down into some fairly convenient genres, and agents, I guess, are a little bit like nomads
in that they follow the source of life.
And in this case, for instance, the hot market right now is the contemporary romances, and
so we have a very active department in the contemporary romances.
Science fiction has become somewhat soft since the Star Trek Star Wars phenomenon, and although
it's still a very active market, we have noticed a kind of sorting out of important writers
from what they call the mid-list writers, that is to say, those writers who aren't quite
of the Brockbuster best seller category, and yet they're better than what some people might
refer to as hacked writers.
They find themselves in a market where there really isn't an audience anymore, so we have
found that writers really have to choose between going to something else or becoming stars in
the science fiction market.
There's no middle ground anymore, and that's true just about all the genres, westerns, romance,
maybe the place that is most open for new writers, inexperienced writers, but in the
science fiction world, I think you must start with some advantage or you're going to have
a tough struggle ahead of you.
I think we've never spoken to an agent before, and from your perspective, I think you can
answer certain questions that I think anybody else would have difficulty answering, and one
of them I wanted to ask you is from your perspective, what determines the popularity of a genre of
literature in paperback?
Is it the publishers who create the taste, or what is the cause?
It's hard to say.
Sometimes the publishers create the taste, and sometimes the market, the consumer creates
the demand, and sometimes it's the agent.
For instance, I find myself very often in speaking to publishers, I find myself in a
double role.
I keep my ears open and try to listen to what a publisher tells me about what he's able
to sell and what he's not able to sell, and so I have a kind of passive role in that I pass
along to authors what the publishers tell me the market is doing.
However, if I begin to notice a trend, I then try to help create a market by turning to other
publishers and saying, listen, I've had lunch the last couple of months with four publishers,
and they all tell me that hard science fiction is not as active as fantasy and source and
sorcery, and so maybe you'd be interested in some source and sorcery.
So an agent is in the position of shaping the market once it begins to detect the trend.
Okay, that was interesting.
I guess after reading a column, of course, I'm coming to understand how much influence an agent can have.
I don't think I realized that before.
Okay, I think I know the answer to this.
In fact, most of the questions I'm asking you, I have some idea of what you'll say because of what I've
read of your work, but still need to ask it.
I know that you have different contracts for different clients or different authors, but say a contract
was any sort of author, not just science fiction, is it dependent upon if an author is new or established
according to what kind of contract you get?
Well, I think authors and agents probably ought to try to penetrate through a lot of the haze
that surrounds contractual negotiations and realize that the essential in a contractual negotiation is who has the power.
For the beginning author, the first author or the author of some works from minor markets, the power
definitely rests for the publisher, with the publisher.
The publisher, the author in effect is saying to the publisher, I will sign anything you hand me
if you publish me.
And the publisher says, well, I'm glad to hear that because if you don't like our terms, we'll find somebody else to write for us.
Now, obviously, the power in that equation lies with the publisher.
However, as an author begins to develop, he has a following.
His books begin to sell.
The prices that he gets for his work begin to escalate.
He may have a bestseller.
He now has other publishers interested in publishing him.
And now the equation is on the other foot, if I may mix the metaphor.
And it's now the author who says, the publisher says, I will do anything to keep you.
And the author says, well, then you'd better meet my terms because there are plenty of publishers out there who will publish me if you don't like what I have,
the terms that I'm ready to dictate.
So when you get down to it, it's raw power.
And the agent tries to put himself in those power vectors, I guess you would say, and get some sense of where they converge.
And that's the point at which a contract materializes.
A contract is a direct reflection of the power flow between the two parties.
And at the point where they all interface, that is what a contract reads.
That's excellent. Very good. You're talking just like you're right, I think.
I'm not sure that's good or bad.
Listen, what science fiction fans are, I think, more fanatic than other types.
And a lot of them, of course, are interested in writing and doing something besides just reading it.
If somebody had reasonable amount of talent, what would you advise an aspiring science fiction author? Where should he begin?
Always begin with the magazines.
You're absolutely right about science fiction fans being more fanatic.
But they are also fortunate in having a place where they can begin in the shorter media where most writers in other genres don't have the chance.
I mean, there are very few places where a romance writer can tease.
You know, you can't write romance short stories unless you try to write some of the slicker women's magazines.
And they are, of course, very demanding in what they accept.
There used to be Western magazines, many, many of them, but almost all of them are gone now.
Mystery magazines are still a couple of them, but it's not like what it used to be when I got into the business about 25 years ago.
So one of the few remaining genres that invites new talent and cultivates it is science fiction,
where you have very active magazine market and anthology market for original stories.
You also have the conventions, of course Western writers, romance writers, mystery writers also have their conventions,
but certainly science fiction writers can out-convention anybody by ratios 10 to 1.
So there's a lot of interplay where authors are always talking to one another,
meeting editors, meeting professional writers,
and there's a much tighter unity than there is in any other genre.
So I would definitely advise any aspiring science fiction writer to start writing in the magazines.
In fact, even some of my well-known clients, I still tell them to continue writing for science fiction magazines,
even though they may get peanuts for their work compared to what they can get writing books,
because the exposure among both science fiction editors and science fiction fans is terribly important.
Okay, I just have about one or two more science fiction, and get on to some more general things.
Would you happen to be working with any unpublished authors at present science fiction that we might look for?
That question kind of catches me unaware.
We have a number of people that we're, you know, we are establishing.
It's very hard to say because in spite of what I said a few moments ago about getting published in magazines,
I mean, like most other agents, we handle very little by way of short fiction.
It's not profitable for an agent to handle science fiction stories,
and there's very little that we can do for a short story writer that he or she can't do for him or herself.
So by the time an author comes to us asking for representation,
and we think that person might be interesting,
he's probably had quite a number of stories published in the science fiction magazines.
I will mention one author that I think is enormously talented,
and will probably burst on the scenes within the next couple of years,
and that's a writer named Dan Simmons who's beginning to make some appearances in Omni and some of the other magazines.
He's a very, very talented writer, and we are about to take on some of his wrongful work.
Okay, one more.
I should accord my thanks to Harlan Ellison who was the first person to spot him and refer him to me.
Okay, good. One more on science fiction.
Are you working on selling or do you have in your hands any big manuscripts from some of your name authors that might be published in the near future?
Well, Gregory Benford has the author of Timescape, which was the Inebula Award winner in the novel category for 1981,
has two novels coming out in the next year.
One is Against Infinity, which is coming out in April, will be published by Timescape Books and Hardcover, a wonderful novel.
And I believe next February we will see, in the ocean of, excuse me, Across the Sea of Suns, which is the sequel to In the Ocean of Night,
and is the second novel in a trilogy.
We also have what I consider a great novel in the making by Richard Grant, who's made some appearances in magazines,
but turned in a spectacular novel, which is now being shaped somewhat and redone.
But it's some of the most brilliant writing I've ever read, and those who have had an early look at it agree with me.
That is a very impressive job.
And I know that when that book is finished, I believe it's got that celebrate all over us.
Okay, do you like trilogies?
Yes, I like them and I encourage them.
I feel they're a very comfortable form for science fiction writers, in fact, for non-science fiction writers as well.
The beauty of a trilogy, of course, from an ancient viewpoint, is in the kind of package deal that one can make where you not only sign an author up for a book,
but you can sign him up for a sequel and a sequel after that.
And the author knows where he's going to be two years from now.
The publisher knows what he can expect over a couple of years, and unless the author one day runs out of steam,
or gets bored with characters that he developed in book one or two,
you can see a cumulative effect in the sales of a trilogy where publication of book two makes people scurry for book one,
and publication of book three causes the publisher to reissue books one and two,
and then they put them in a box set and they're reviewed as a whole.
It's a very nice way of publishing books, but not everybody has a sequel in them.
Right. Why does an author with reasonable talent need an agent?
There are very few authors who, once they achieve publication, are really able or even want to handle their own business
until you become a full-blooded professional writer with a track record, as I said before.
Most of your job is writing your magazine stuff, sending it out, and developing a magazine market.
But once you begin selling, unless you really understand contractual language,
then you're going to need an agent to interpret it for you.
Also, most authors are not as objective about their work as an agent can be,
and therefore they either demand too much or too little when they negotiate a contract.
So an agent can help put things in perspective and can talk both publishers and authors into being reasonable.
Agents can also exploit subsidiary rights that authors are only dimly aware of,
and agents finally are able to help build an author's career by spotting that author's strengths and weaknesses,
and building, of course, on the strengths and developing their talents to the utmost.
There are a few authors I know, most notably Isaac Asimov, who I don't believe has agents or at least not regular agents,
and Isaac certainly has done okay for himself, although I think there are probably five dozen agents who have said to him,
think how well you would have done if you'd have an agent.
But most authors sooner or later feel that it is well worth the commission and other things to have somebody,
particularly when you don't live in the New York area, which is the heart of the publishing world.
You live in California or Nebraska or something like that.
There's nothing so frightening as to be out of touch with a publisher
and not having anybody that you can call to act on your behalf.
Okay, a more personal question.
Your book, How to Be Your Own Literary Agent, of course I haven't seen that yet,
but are you trying to put yourself out of business with that?
I don't think I will for the reasons that I just told you.
The title may not be exactly accurate because although it is designed to help new authors get a foot in the door
that they might not otherwise have, it's also aimed at the professional author who may have an agent
who may be of the kind who simply signs on the dotted line when his agent sticks a contract under his nose.
And those authors, I think, are usually the ones who end up discovering a couple of years down the road
that they made a horrible mistake when they signed that contract.
And why didn't their agent tell them about certain things?
And so my feeling is that an enlightened author is probably an agent's best friend,
whether he's represented by an agent or not.
The more that an author knows about contracts and related subjects,
the tougher he's going to be in dealing with the publishers
and the more he's going to benefit the entire fraternity and sorority of authors in this country
and make an agent's job easier.
So I don't feel that I've contradicted myself by publishing a book called How to Be Your Own Literary Agent.
Okay, as the title indicates then, that really is a how-to book.
Well, it does tell you, for instance, if you're a new author,
it tells you what genres are the rightfulest ones to buy your work,
how to write for them, how to package your work for them,
how to get your work on the desk of an editor and avoid the so-called flush pile.
It tells you what to do if you should get an offer.
It tells you how to negotiate on your own.
It tells you how to oversee what your agent is doing if you should decide to turn your work over to an agent.
It tells you how to hire and fire an agent.
And it completely analyzes publishing contracts from start to finish
and interprets each clause in a way that any author can certainly get an advantage by studying my suggestions.
So really, I guess even the beginner would get some good out of the book.
Absolutely.
Okay, good. When will that be out again?
Let's see. Today is the 15th. Three days is the official publication date. February 18th.
Okay, very good.
It's already created something of a controversy in New York
because one of the chapters in the book is a somewhat outspoken attack on publishing accounting systems.
Publishers have a tendency to do what I call creative accounting,
which the bottom line is that they hold hide or misguide authors as to how much in royalties they're entitled to.
And a couple of days ago, the New York Times picked up on that chapter
and published an article under the headline, Agent Says Publishers Achieving Authors.
So we've got what I consider very healthy controversy going,
and that's certainly one that every author ought to be interested in because it really is the gut issue.
I know many new authors and aspiring authors, all they want to know is,
who's going to publish my book and whatever they pay me, whatever advance I get is fine with me.
But as they become more and more professional and experienced, they may wake up one day
and realize that they're not getting everything that's owing to them because the publishers have obscured
some of the royalty reporting systems that would enable and ought to get his full due.
And so I've tried to dispel some of the mystery around the reading of royalty statements,
so publishers, the authors can get a better idea of what is being told to them
and whether any money is being hidden.
Okay, and reading your columns over a period of time,
I think I've caught you seeing a couple times that even with a lot of talent and even with a great manuscript,
writers still may not make it because of the way the publishing industry is set up.
Is that sort of a cynical attitude on your part?
Well, I don't say it with any pride. I say it with a great deal of sadness.
In the last couple of years, the prices of books have gone prohibitively high.
A hardcover novel these days sells for anywhere from $15 to $20,
and a paperback novel sells anywhere from $3 to $5 or even a little more.
And the consumer, the book buyer, is shying away from the marketplace now
because he seems to feel there are better ways to spend $20 or $5 even.
As a result, the book sales have been dropping,
and the publishers have become more and more selective as to what they buy.
Unfortunately, that all gets passed down to the author.
And more and more frequently in the last couple of years, I have had to turn away,
as all my colleagues in the agency business have had to do.
I've had to turn away a number of very good books that were well written,
but didn't really fit into certain categories that I know are actively buying.
And so what you end up with is a well-written book that really isn't saleable.
And it can often break your heart to send a book like that back.
It doesn't hurt you as much to send back a bad book as it does to send back a good one,
but there's nothing guaranteeing that a good book is going to sell.
And that, I would say, is possibly the major difference between publishing today
and publishing 10 years ago.
Okay, one more follow-up on that.
Is the system, or does the system, as you describe it, lead to sort of hack writing
or writing that's not very good?
No, quite the contrary.
I think the level of writing is getting better
because publishers don't need to publish hack writing anymore
when they can get so many good writers.
The market has shrunk, for instance, from the paperback field,
whereas about two or three years ago there were, I would say, 13 active, viable paperbacks
ranging from the modest size one to the giant.
Several have gone out of business,
and three or four more have been absorbed into other companies,
and now one can count six or seven paperback publishers' rests.
And so the, you know, the clamor to be published by those houses is increasing,
and so the publishers can afford to be more selective than ever before.
So my feeling is that the, although I don't like to use the word hack,
certainly the inferior writer is either going to have to try harder
or he's going to drop out because there are just too many good writers waiting to take his place.
Okay, Mr. Curtis, I have about, I want to move, I have about ten minutes left
if you can spare that.
I wanted to talk about some personal things about your background and your own work
if you have the time for that.
Absolutely.
Okay, I was going to say how does one become an agent,
but I guess I better ask how you became one.
Well, when I think for a long time I always wanted to be a writer,
and when I got out of college I discovered that there were no real jobs for writers,
so I decided to get into a related field publishing.
Could not find a job at a publishing company,
so I finally ended up working for a leading literary agency, Scott Merida,
and there I stayed for some seven or eight years, and that was my apprenticeship.
And after some seven years I really did have an itch to write,
and so I had been writing even while I worked for Scott Merida, so I left that firm
and became a freelance writer, and of course, having been an agent,
I was much better connected than most freelance writers could ever hope to be,
so the transition was not as hard for me as it would be if somebody left some other job.
I did a lot of magazine work, but eventually realized that the magazine market was in its twilight
and began focusing on books.
I wrote a lot of paperback novels and then eventually got into such areas of collaboration,
books on conservation.
I found that I had a forte in the area of humor, so I did a number of satirical books.
I wrote just about anything that people would pay money for, and it was a very, very good grounding.
And after about five years of that, a number of my old clients looked me up and asked me if I would represent them,
and since I was not making a fortune as a writer in spite of the fact that to date I've had about 45 books published,
I decided that perhaps I would go back into agenting, and I started my own firm.
And for two or three years, I was both a writer and a literary agent,
and literally I had two desks back to back with a flivel chair between them,
and in the morning I would do one thing, and in the afternoon I would do another,
and I would try not to let one contaminate the other.
And eventually, when I discovered that I could make more money on a few phone calls as an agent,
then I could for four or five months writing books.
It was pretty clear to me where my career was heading, but I had not given up my writing.
The column, of course, is very satisfying, and from time to time I might take a crack at a commercial novel or a nonfiction book.
I get up at five or six in the morning, I'll write for an hour or so, then I'll go to work,
and although an hour a day may not seem like a lot, as most professional writers will tell you,
over a period of a couple of months one can write a book at an hour a day,
as long as you stay with it and turn out something every day.
So I do consider myself a literary agent with a side order of writing.
In looking over the books that I know you've written in the past few years,
it seems to me that a lot of your nonfiction books have been dealing with issues of social concern,
like the nuclear lessons, the inequality of American communities, and so forth.
Is that because of personal taste or because of your collaborators?
Well, I take some pride in some of the work that I've done in the area of conservation.
Around 1970 or so I was approached by a woman who had accumulated a great deal of quite terrifying information
about the nuclear power industry, and she asked me to collaborate with her.
I knew very little about it, but I did work with her,
and out of that collaboration came a book that was published by Double Day called Perils of the Peaceful Atom.
It was the first popular book on the dangers of nuclear power plants,
and although it was supplanted later on by books published by people, authorities, scientists, and PhDs,
whereas we were only laymen and women, I like to think that that book did open the door to discussion
of the nuclear power issues, which finally culminated in the Three Mile Island accident years later,
and I was able to say that I had told you so.
Many of the things that happened were predicted in that book years earlier,
and of course nobody really wanted to listen.
So I have written some other books of social value, and I'm very proud of them.
I'm also, if I may add, very proud as an agent to have brought into the world many books on social issues and things like that.
We recently handled a magnificent first novel about the Vietnam War called The Thirteenth Valley,
which went on the bestseller list, and opened the door to what I know will now be a state of Vietnam fiction.
Up until that time, people had said that nobody really wanted to read about Vietnam,
and so we've now enabled some fresh air to grow into the marketplace with that novel,
and again, this is an accomplishment that I'm very proud of.
What about your fiction, your novel?
Can you give me an idea of what kind of things you write about, if they sell well?
Well, a couple years ago, while I was still, well, more than that, about a decade ago,
I conceived a paperback series featuring a hero that I always thought was rather unusual.
He was a detective in the area of sports, and a series of books featuring this hero
was, the series was called The Pro, and the books were published by Warner.
We did four of those, and at the moment I'm trying to revive that series or something along those lines,
because right now, although there's a great deal of male action-adventure fiction being published,
everybody's getting bored with the same old heroes, the mercenaries, the dirty dozens,
and series like that, and so I'm trying to get revived, this hero that I think is a rather refreshing one,
but I'm not able to do too much in the fiction area simply because of time.
Okay, I just have a couple more here.
I remember reading one of your columns where you mentioned, I guess it was an innovation on your part as an agent,
where you contracted with a publicity firm for your clients and so forth.
I wondered if you've, things like that that you've done for your clients,
it might be a little different or innovative or whatever?
Well, every agent, of course, is trying to seek a better way to handle his clients and more advantages for his clients,
and one of the things that upsets me deeply is the fact that publishers are very reluctant to spend promotional money
on any authors except the big name celebrity authors,
and so I attempted, a couple of years ago, to rectify that by asking my clients in effect to chip in.
Each one of them would be, in effect, taxed a couple of extra percentage points of commission,
and that tax would go towards a fund which we used to hire a publicity agent who would publicize the little guy.
And some of the campaigns were quite successful.
Some aspects of the campaign were not so successful,
and it was because of the inconsistency of the results that we finally dropped the program,
but some of it has had lasting results and certainly created a lot of talk in the industry and among authors.
And it was, I thought, a noble experiment in the area of getting the lesser known authors publicized,
but it's still difficult.
The market inclines towards the big name,
and the struggle to become a big name is extremely intense, and very, very few people emerge.
Okay, what about movie deals for books that are worthy of it?
Do you actively seek the matter? Do movie houses come to you?
Well, it's a combination.
Most books that are published, that are of any value at all,
are covered by the movie studios, producers, and the people in New York whose job it is to scout on behalf of various Hollywood interests.
So the chances are that if you have any, if an agent is handling a good book at all,
it will have been seen in one way or another by producers, directors, studio people, and so forth.
They have amazing ways of getting hold of manuscripts no matter how secretive you try to be.
And so, wrong before you're ready to show them, they've already been exposed.
Nevertheless, if we get a hot manuscript that we really think is going to make a terrific book,
we actively try to find a movie producer for it, and so sometimes the deals come to us, and sometimes we generate them.
Okay, that's about, I mean, there's lots of questions. I could keep on talking for a long time,
but I think we have enough, and we've taken enough of your time.
But listen, is there anything I haven't asked that you think listeners should know,
or anything at all that you'd like to talk about, or we still have some tape left?
No, we're happy to answer any other questions you may have.
I will say that we were talking about innovations before.
I may be springing a very radical proposition on the publishing industry that I believe will create a lot of talk and controversy,
and I'm not doing it just to publicize myself, but I've begun to, because of my deep concern about royalty accounting
and how publishers have managed to manipulate and hide author's royalties,
I'm going to be making a proposal to the publishing industry about a radically different way of accounting royalties,
based not on sales, but on copies printed, and I would say that within the next few months
you might begin looking for some stirring in that area, and I believe it could have some rather radical effects
on the way people think about the traditional way of accounting royalties.
I remember some of your calls, I think you sort of hinted at certain things about the way the publishers did that.
Right, well I actually do suggest something like it in my book, but I will now be amplifying on it,
and if I can get some of the publishing media to pick up on these suggestions,
it should make for a very, very lively dialogue, and certainly one that's well over do in this 18th century business we call publishing.
I take it then in the three-part relationship here, a writer, an agent, and a publisher,
that you would say probably the publisher has much the best of it?
No, I don't think so at all. I've heard everybody accuse everybody else of having the best of it.
There are rich agents, there are agents who are struggling, there are rich authors and authors who are struggling,
and there are rich publishers and there are publishers who are struggling.
I, in spite of some of the belligerent things I may have said, I have a great, great many friends among the publishers,
and I want to see them do well, and so I've come to think of it as a symbiotic environment in which everybody really does depend on everybody else.
And an agent's job is not just to negotiate contracts, but to negotiate interests so that nobody gets so badly hurt that he can't carry on.
I mean, publishers are always complaining about their overhead, and it's well to rebuy them that agents have to pay their rent also,
but some agents get very greedy and they feel that the only way for an author to become famous is to pin the publisher to the wall with a cruel deal,
and sometimes they can backfire in terms of how much money is left after you've hit a publisher that hard, how much money is left for the struggling author.
The paperback publisher that consistently pays two or three million dollars for one or two authors is going to find himself neglecting the new author because he can't afford to pay him,
or if he should buy a new author's work he won't have any money left to publicize or promote that author's book.
So there's something even to be said for not being greedy on behalf of your authors and giving the publisher an even break.
Okay, very good. Okay, listen, we're going to turn off the recorder now. We're just about to tape any...